README.md, before:

# 🔧 Plumber

Find compliance issues in your GitLab repositories and their CI/CD pipelines.

## 🎯 What it does

Plumber scans your GitLab CI/CD configuration and run following controls:

- 🏷️ **Mutable image tags** — Flags `latest`, `dev`, and other non-reproducible tags for container images used in CI/CD pipelines
- 🔒 **Untrusted image registries** — Ensures container images used in your CI/CD pipelines come from approved sources
- 🛡️ **Branch protection compliance** — Verifies that repository branches are properly protected
- Other controls will come

## 🚀 Quick Start (GitLab CI)

**1. Add your token**

Go to **Settings → CI/CD → Variables** and add:
- Name: `GITLAB_TOKEN`
- Scopes: `read_api`, `read_repository`

**2. Add to `.gitlab-ci.yml`**

```yaml
include:
  - component: gitlab.com/getplumber/plumber/plumber@~latest
```

✅ That's it! Plumber runs on MRs, main branch, and tags.

> 💡 Everything is customizable — GitLab URL, branch, threshold, and more. See [Customize](#️-customize) below.

### ⚠️ Self-Hosted GitLab

If you're running a self-hosted GitLab instance, you'll need to create your own component since `gitlab.com` components can't be accessed from your instance.

**Option 1:** Fork our [GitLab component](https://gitlab.com/getplumber/plumber) to your instance

**Option 2:** Create a component using [`templates/plumber.yml`](templates/plumber.yml) as a base

See [GitLab's CI/CD component documentation](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/ci/components/) for setup instructions.

## ⚙️ Customize

Override any input to fit your needs:

```yaml
include:
  - component: gitlab.com/getplumber/plumber/plumber@~latest
    inputs:
      # Target (defaults to current project)
      server_url: https://gitlab.example.com  # Self-hosted GitLab
      project_path: other-group/other-project # Analyze a different project
      branch: develop                         # Analyze a specific branch

      # Compliance
      threshold: 80                           # Minimum % to pass (default: 100)
      config_file: $CI_PROJECT_DIR/.plumber.yaml  # Custom config from your repo

      # Output
      output_file: plumber-report.json        # Export JSON report
      print_output: true                      # Print to stdout (default: true)

      # Job behavior
      stage: test                             # Run in a different stage (default: .pre)
      allow_failure: true                     # Don't block pipeline on failure
      gitlab_token: $MY_CUSTOM_TOKEN          # Use a different token variable
```

### All Inputs

| Input | Default | Description |
|-------|---------|-------------|
| `server_url` | `$CI_SERVER_URL` | GitLab instance URL |
| `project_path` | `$CI_PROJECT_PATH` | Project to analyze |
| `branch` | `$CI_COMMIT_REF_NAME` | Branch to analyze |
| `gitlab_token` | `$GITLAB_TOKEN` | CI/CD variable with the API token |
| `threshold` | `100` | Minimum compliance % to pass |
| `config_file` | `/.plumber.yaml` | Path to configuration file |
| `output_file` | `""` | Path to write JSON results |
| `print_output` | `true` | Print text output to stdout |
| `stage` | `.pre` | Pipeline stage for the job |
| `image` | `getplumber/plumber:0.1` | Docker image to use |
| `allow_failure` | `false` | Allow job to fail without blocking |

## 💻 Test Locally (CLI)

### Download Binary

Pre-built binaries are available for each release:

```bash
# Linux (amd64)
curl -LO https://github.com/getplumber/plumber/releases/latest/download/plumber-linux-amd64
chmod +x plumber-linux-amd64
sudo mv plumber-linux-amd64 /usr/local/bin/plumber

# Linux (arm64)
curl -LO https://github.com/getplumber/plumber/releases/latest/download/plumber-linux-arm64
chmod +x plumber-linux-arm64
sudo mv plumber-linux-arm64 /usr/local/bin/plumber

# macOS (Apple Silicon)
curl -LO https://github.com/getplumber/plumber/releases/latest/download/plumber-darwin-arm64
chmod +x plumber-darwin-arm64
sudo mv plumber-darwin-arm64 /usr/local/bin/plumber

# macOS (Intel)
curl -LO https://github.com/getplumber/plumber/releases/latest/download/plumber-darwin-amd64
chmod +x plumber-darwin-amd64
sudo mv plumber-darwin-amd64 /usr/local/bin/plumber

# Windows (PowerShell)
Invoke-WebRequest -Uri https://github.com/getplumber/plumber/releases/latest/download/plumber-windows-amd64.exe -OutFile plumber.exe
```

**Verify checksum** (optional):

```bash
curl -LO https://github.com/getplumber/plumber/releases/latest/download/checksums.txt
sha256sum -c checksums.txt --ignore-missing
```

**Run analysis:**

```bash
export GITLAB_TOKEN=glpat-xxxx
plumber analyze \
  --gitlab-url https://gitlab.com \
  --project mygroup/myproject \
  --branch main \
  --config .plumber.yaml \
  --threshold 100
```

### Docker

```bash
# Run analysis
docker run --rm \
  -e GITLAB_TOKEN=glpat-xxxx \
  getplumber/plumber:latest analyze \
  --gitlab-url https://gitlab.com \
  --project mygroup/myproject \
  --branch main \
  --config /.plumber.yaml \
  --threshold 100

# Save JSON output locally
docker run --rm \
  -e GITLAB_TOKEN=glpat-xxxx \
  -v $(pwd):/output \
  getplumber/plumber:latest analyze \
  --gitlab-url https://gitlab.com \
  --project mygroup/myproject \
  --branch main \
  --config /.plumber.yaml \
  --threshold 100 \
  --output /output/results.json
```

### Build from Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/getplumber/plumber.git
cd plumber
go build -o plumber .

export GITLAB_TOKEN=glpat-xxxx
./plumber analyze \
  --gitlab-url https://gitlab.com \
  --project mygroup/myproject \
  --branch main \
  --config .plumber.yaml \
  --threshold 100
```

## 📋 Example Output

```
Project: mygroup/myproject

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
Mutable Image Tags (100.0% compliant)
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
  Total Images: 10
  Using Mutable Tags: 0

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
Untrusted Image Sources (0.0% compliant)
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
  Total Images: 10
  Trusted: 6
  Untrusted: 4

  Untrusted Images Found:
    • Job 'sls_scan' uses untrusted image: docker.io/shiftleft/sast-scan:v1.15.1
    • Job 'gitleaks' uses untrusted image: docker.io/zricethezav/gitleaks:v8.15.0
    • Job 'golint' uses untrusted image: docker.io/docker/golangci-lint:2.5.0-go1.25.3
    • Job 'tag-production-image' uses untrusted image: gcr.io/go-containerregistry/crane:debug

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
Branch Protection (100.0% compliant)
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
  Total Branches: 8
  Branches to Protect: 1
  Protected Branches: 1
  Unprotected: 0
  Non-Compliant: 0

────────────────────
Summary
────────────────────

  Status: FAILED ✗

  Issues
  ╔══════════════════════════════╤══════════╗
  ║ Control                      │   Issues ║
  ╟──────────────────────────────┼──────────╢
  ║ Mutable Image Tags           │        0 ║
  ║ Untrusted Image Sources      │        4 ║
  ║ Branch Protection            │        0 ║
  ╚══════════════════════════════╧══════════╝

  Compliance
  ╔══════════════════════════════╤════════════╤══════════╗
  ║ Control                      │ Compliance │   Status ║
  ╟──────────────────────────────┼────────────┼──────────╢
  ║ Mutable Image Tags           │     100.0% │        ✓ ║
  ║ Untrusted Image Sources      │       0.0% │        ✗ ║
  ║ Branch Protection            │     100.0% │        ✓ ║
  ╟──────────────────────────────┼────────────┼──────────╢
  ║ Total (required: 100%)       │      66.7% │        ✗ ║
  ╚══════════════════════════════╧════════════╧══════════╝
```

## 📝 Configuration

Create a `.plumber.yaml` in your repo to customize controls:

```yaml
version: "1.0"

controls:
  imageMutable:
    enabled: true
    mutableTags:
      - latest
      - dev

  imageUntrusted:
    enabled: true
    trustDockerHubOfficialImages: true
    trustedUrls:
      - registry.gitlab.com/*
      - $CI_REGISTRY_IMAGE:*

  branchProtection:
    enabled: true
    defaultMustBeProtected: true
    namePatterns:
      - main
      - release/*
```

See [`.plumber.yaml`](.plumber.yaml) for the full reference with all options.

## 🔍 CLI Reference

```
plumber analyze [flags]

Flags:
  --gitlab-url    GitLab instance URL (required)
  --project       Project path, e.g., group/project (required)
  --config        Path to .plumber.yaml (required)
  --threshold     Minimum compliance % to pass (required)
  --branch        Branch to analyze (default: project default)
  --output        Write JSON results to file
  --print         Print text output (default: true)

Environment:
  GITLAB_TOKEN    GitLab API token (required)

Exit Codes:
  0  Passed (compliance ≥ threshold)
  1  Failed (compliance < threshold or error)
```

## 🔧 Troubleshooting

| Issue | Solution |
|-------|----------|
| `GITLAB_TOKEN environment variable is required` | Add `GITLAB_TOKEN` in CI/CD Variables |
| `401 Unauthorized` | Token should have `read_api` + `read_repository` scopes |
| `403 Forbidden` on MR settings | Expected on non-Premium GitLab; continues without that data |

## 📄 License

[Elastic License 2.0 (ELv2)](LICENSE) — Free to use. Cannot be offered as a managed service.

Commit message:

feat(UX): Define default output file, add output json example

README.md, after:

# 🔧 Plumber

Find compliance issues in your GitLab repositories and their CI/CD pipelines.

## 🎯 What it does

Plumber scans your GitLab CI/CD configuration and run following controls:

- 🏷️ **Mutable image tags** — Flags `latest`, `dev`, and other non-reproducible tags for container images used in CI/CD pipelines
- 🔒 **Untrusted image registries** — Ensures container images used in your CI/CD pipelines come from approved sources
- 🛡️ **Branch protection compliance** — Verifies that repository branches are properly protected
- Other controls will come

## 🚀 Quick Start (GitLab CI)

**1. Add your token**

Go to **Settings → CI/CD → Variables** and add:
- Name: `GITLAB_TOKEN`
- Scopes: `read_api`, `read_repository`

**2. Add to `.gitlab-ci.yml`**

```yaml
include:
  - component: gitlab.com/getplumber/plumber/plumber@~latest
```

✅ That's it! Plumber runs on MRs, main branch, and tags.

> 💡 Everything is customizable — GitLab URL, branch, threshold, and more. See [Customize](#️-customize) below.

### ⚠️ Self-Hosted GitLab

If you're running a self-hosted GitLab instance, you'll need to create your own component since `gitlab.com` components can't be accessed from your instance.

**Option 1:** Fork our [GitLab component](https://gitlab.com/getplumber/plumber) to your instance

**Option 2:** Create a component using [`templates/plumber.yml`](templates/plumber.yml) as a base

See [GitLab's CI/CD component documentation](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/ci/components/) for setup instructions.

## ⚙️ Customize

Override any input to fit your needs:

```yaml
include:
  - component: gitlab.com/getplumber/plumber/plumber@~latest
    inputs:
      # Target (defaults to current project)
      server_url: https://gitlab.example.com  # Self-hosted GitLab
      project_path: other-group/other-project # Analyze a different project
      branch: develop                         # Analyze a specific branch

      # Compliance
      threshold: 80                           # Minimum % to pass (default: 100)
      config_file: $CI_PROJECT_DIR/.plumber.yaml  # Custom config from your repo

      # Output
      output_file: plumber-report.json        # Export JSON report
      print_output: true                      # Print to stdout (default: true)

      # Job behavior
      stage: test                             # Run in a different stage (default: .pre)
      allow_failure: true                     # Don't block pipeline on failure
      gitlab_token: $MY_CUSTOM_TOKEN          # Use a different token variable
```

### All Inputs

| Input | Default | Description |
|-------|---------|-------------|
| `server_url` | `$CI_SERVER_URL` | GitLab instance URL |
| `project_path` | `$CI_PROJECT_PATH` | Project to analyze |
| `branch` | `$CI_COMMIT_REF_NAME` | Branch to analyze |
| `gitlab_token` | `$GITLAB_TOKEN` | CI/CD variable with the API token |
| `threshold` | `100` | Minimum compliance % to pass |
| `config_file` | `/.plumber.yaml` | Path to configuration file |
| `output_file` | `""` | Path to write JSON results |
| `print_output` | `true` | Print text output to stdout |
| `stage` | `.pre` | Pipeline stage for the job |
| `image` | `getplumber/plumber:0.1` | Docker image to use |
| `allow_failure` | `false` | Allow job to fail without blocking |

## 💻 Test Locally (CLI)

### Download Binary

Pre-built binaries are available for each release:

```bash
# Linux (amd64)
curl -LO https://github.com/getplumber/plumber/releases/latest/download/plumber-linux-amd64
chmod +x plumber-linux-amd64
sudo mv plumber-linux-amd64 /usr/local/bin/plumber

# Linux (arm64)
curl -LO https://github.com/getplumber/plumber/releases/latest/download/plumber-linux-arm64
chmod +x plumber-linux-arm64
sudo mv plumber-linux-arm64 /usr/local/bin/plumber

# macOS (Apple Silicon)
curl -LO https://github.com/getplumber/plumber/releases/latest/download/plumber-darwin-arm64
chmod +x plumber-darwin-arm64
sudo mv plumber-darwin-arm64 /usr/local/bin/plumber

# macOS (Intel)
curl -LO https://github.com/getplumber/plumber/releases/latest/download/plumber-darwin-amd64
chmod +x plumber-darwin-amd64
sudo mv plumber-darwin-amd64 /usr/local/bin/plumber

# Windows (PowerShell)
Invoke-WebRequest -Uri https://github.com/getplumber/plumber/releases/latest/download/plumber-windows-amd64.exe -OutFile plumber.exe
```

**Verify checksum** (optional):

```bash
curl -LO https://github.com/getplumber/plumber/releases/latest/download/checksums.txt
sha256sum -c checksums.txt --ignore-missing
```

**Run analysis:**

```bash
export GITLAB_TOKEN=glpat-xxxx
plumber analyze \
  --gitlab-url https://gitlab.com \
  --project mygroup/myproject \
  --branch main \
  --config .plumber.yaml \
  --threshold 100
```

### Docker

```bash
# Run analysis
docker run --rm \
  -e GITLAB_TOKEN=glpat-xxxx \
  getplumber/plumber:latest analyze \
  --gitlab-url https://gitlab.com \
  --project mygroup/myproject \
  --branch main \
  --config /.plumber.yaml \
  --threshold 100

# Save JSON output locally
docker run --rm \
  -e GITLAB_TOKEN=glpat-xxxx \
  -v $(pwd):/output \
  getplumber/plumber:latest analyze \
  --gitlab-url https://gitlab.com \
  --project mygroup/myproject \
  --branch main \
  --config /.plumber.yaml \
  --threshold 100 \
  --output /output/results.json
```

### Build from Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/getplumber/plumber.git
cd plumber
go build -o plumber .

export GITLAB_TOKEN=glpat-xxxx
./plumber analyze \
  --gitlab-url https://gitlab.com \
  --project mygroup/myproject \
  --branch main \
  --config .plumber.yaml \
  --threshold 100
```

## 📋 Example Output

```
Project: mygroup/myproject

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
Mutable Image Tags (100.0% compliant)
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
  Total Images: 10
  Using Mutable Tags: 0

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
Untrusted Image Sources (0.0% compliant)
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
  Total Images: 10
  Trusted: 6
  Untrusted: 4

  Untrusted Images Found:
    • Job 'sls_scan' uses untrusted image: docker.io/shiftleft/sast-scan:v1.15.1
    • Job 'gitleaks' uses untrusted image: docker.io/zricethezav/gitleaks:v8.15.0
    • Job 'golint' uses untrusted image: docker.io/docker/golangci-lint:2.5.0-go1.25.3
    • Job 'tag-production-image' uses untrusted image: gcr.io/go-containerregistry/crane:debug

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
Branch Protection (100.0% compliant)
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
  Total Branches: 8
  Branches to Protect: 1
  Protected Branches: 1
  Unprotected: 0
  Non-Compliant: 0

────────────────────
Summary
────────────────────

  Status: FAILED ✗

  Issues
  ╔══════════════════════════════╤══════════╗
  ║ Control                      │   Issues ║
  ╟──────────────────────────────┼──────────╢
  ║ Mutable Image Tags           │        0 ║
  ║ Untrusted Image Sources      │        4 ║
  ║ Branch Protection            │        0 ║
  ╚══════════════════════════════╧══════════╝

  Compliance
  ╔══════════════════════════════╤════════════╤══════════╗
  ║ Control                      │ Compliance │   Status ║
  ╟──────────────────────────────┼────────────┼──────────╢
  ║ Mutable Image Tags           │     100.0% │        ✓ ║
  ║ Untrusted Image Sources      │       0.0% │        ✗ ║
  ║ Branch Protection            │     100.0% │        ✓ ║
  ╟──────────────────────────────┼────────────┼──────────╢
  ║ Total (required: 100%)       │      66.7% │        ✗ ║
  ╚══════════════════════════════╧════════════╧══════════╝
```

> 💡 **JSON Output:** When using `--output`, results are saved as JSON. See [`output-example.json`](output-example.json) for the full structure.

## 📝 Configuration

Create a `.plumber.yaml` in your repo to customize controls:

```yaml
version: "1.0"

controls:
  imageMutable:
    enabled: true
    mutableTags:
      - latest
      - dev

  imageUntrusted:
    enabled: true
    trustDockerHubOfficialImages: true
    trustedUrls:
      - registry.gitlab.com/*
      - $CI_REGISTRY_IMAGE:*

  branchProtection:
    enabled: true
    defaultMustBeProtected: true
    namePatterns:
      - main
      - release/*
```

See [`.plumber.yaml`](.plumber.yaml) for the full reference with all options.

## 🔍 CLI Reference

```
plumber analyze [flags]

Flags:
  --gitlab-url    GitLab instance URL (required)
  --project       Project path, e.g., group/project (required)
  --config        Path to .plumber.yaml (required)
  --threshold     Minimum compliance % to pass (required)
  --branch        Branch to analyze (default: project default)
  --output        Write JSON results to file
  --print         Print text output (default: true)

Environment:
  GITLAB_TOKEN    GitLab API token (required)

Exit Codes:
  0  Passed (compliance ≥ threshold)
  1  Failed (compliance < threshold or error)
```

## 🔧 Troubleshooting

| Issue | Solution |
|-------|----------|
| `GITLAB_TOKEN environment variable is required` | Add `GITLAB_TOKEN` in CI/CD Variables |
| `401 Unauthorized` | Token should have `read_api` + `read_repository` scopes |
| `403 Forbidden` on MR settings | Expected on non-Premium GitLab; continues without that data |

## 📄 License

[Elastic License 2.0 (ELv2)](LICENSE) — Free to use. Cannot be offered as a managed service.
